README.md, before:

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/LIVVkit/LIVVkit/imgs/livvkit.png)

# LIVVkit Extensions (LivvEX)

This repository holds a collection of extensions to
[LIVVkit](https://livvkit.github.io/Docs/index.html) for validation and
custom analyses of ice sheet models and their associated Earth system
models.

LEX was first described in Evans, et al., 2019[^1]

## Dependencies

The Python dependencies are listed in requirements.txt and requirements-dev.txt but
this suite depends on a set of reanalysis and observational datasets,
which are part of E3SM-Diags, available on several DOE supported
machines, including Perlmutter at NERSC, and Chrysalis at ANL\'s LCRC.

The Python package itself is described in `pyproject.toml`, which is used by
`pip` to install this package

Currently, LEX is designed to run on NERSC's Perlmutter, and ANL-LCRC's Chrysalis, 
but future work is planned to support other machines where E3SM runs.

## Environment setup

For setting up an environment to which lex and dependencies will be
installed, conda and Python virtualenv are documented here. **NB** this
will only currently work on NERSC's Perlmutter, the environment should be
created there.

### Conda environment
```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/LIVVkit/lex.git
$ cd lex
$ {conda, mamba} create -n lex_env python --file requirements.txt
$ {conda, mamba} activate lex_env
$ pip install -e .    # Installs the lex module as an editable Python package to the lex_env environment.
```

### Python virtualenv
```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/LIVVkit/lex.git
$ cd lex
$ module load python/3.13
$ python -m venv .env --prompt lex_env  # Creates the virtual env in ${HOME}/lex/.env
$ source .env/bin/activate              # Switch to the new environment
$ pip install --upgrade pip             # Needed if the system pip version < 21.3
$ pip install -e .                      # Installs LEX as editable
```

This will create a virtual environment at `lex/.env`, and install the
LEX package as editable with all its Python requirements to run.

### Other available environment management solutions
Not documented here, but also available for environment management
- [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/)
- [pixi](https://pixi.sh/latest/)

## Basic usage

Within the `lex/config` directory there are templates for
ELM r05 and r025 resolutions, as well as pre-existing configurations for
several current runs.

To execute any of these analyses, point `livv` (LIVVkit\'s command line
interface) to any of these extensions via the the `-V/--validate`
option.

For example, to run the minimal example extension, place the output
website in the `vv_test` directory, and serve the output
website you\'d run this command:

```bash
$ livv -V config/example/example.yml -o vv_test -s
```
This will create a directory in the current directory called `vv_test` (~7.5 MB), and spawn an HTTP server, which should only be used for testing purposes. (This works best if the output is in the current directory)

*Note:* All the extension configurations files assume you are working
from the top level `lex` directory. You *can* run any of these
extensions from any directory, but you will need to edit the paths in
the YAML configuration files so that `livv` can find the required files.

Likewise, you can also apply these analyses to any new model run[^2] by
adjusting the paths to point to your model run.

## Running existing cases on PM-CPU

The `lex/run_livv.sh` script will run all the currently
available analyses on pm-cpu for a particular case, e.g.:
```bash
$ cd $HOME/lex
$ ./run_livv.sh v2.1.r025.IGERA5ELM_MLI-deep_firn_1980_2020
```
Will create a web output at `/global/cfs/projectdirs/e3sm/www/${USER}/v2.1.r025.IGERA5ELM_MLI-deep_firn_1980_2020`,
viewable at https://portal.nersc.gov/project/e3sm/${USER}/v2.1.r025.IGERA5ELM_MLI-deep_firn_1980_2020

The batch script provided will run all current cases on Perlmutter on a
compute node in parallel
```bash
$ cd lex
$ sbatch run_lex_pm-cpu.sbatch
```

## Running new cases on PM-CPU

### Generate a single timeseries file from ELM h0 outputs
- `ncrcat -v topo,landfrac,QSNOFRZ,FSRND,FSRVD,FSDSVD,FSDSND,EFLX_LH_TOT,FIRA,FLDS,FSA,FSDS,FSH,QICE,QRUNOFF,QSNOMELT,QSOIL,RAIN,SNOW,TSA,SNOWICE,SNOWLIQ,H2OSNO elm*h0*.nc -o ${CASE}.nc`

### Perform post-processing on a single time series ELM h0 output
- Edit the `lex/lex/postproc/e3sm/postproc.sbatch` batch file to mach the new run

    Key variables:
    - `INDIR`: Path which contains single output time series file
    - `OUTCASE`: Name of the new case which is the name of the netCDF file without extension (e.g. `v2.1.r025.IGERA5ELM_MLI-deep_firn_1980_2020`)
    - `RES`: ELM output resolution (currently accepts `R05` and `R025`)
    - `OUTDIR`: Scratch directory into which climatology files will be written, defaults to `${SCRATCH}/lex/data/e3sm/${OUTCASE}`
- Run the post-processing script:
  - `cd lex/lex/postproc/e3sm; sbatch postproc.sbatch`

**NB**: the `postproc.sbatch` script will create the configuration for your case (based on `OUTCASE` and `OUTDIR`), then run LIVVkit on it with `lex/run_livv.sh`

## Developing a custom extension

See the [LIVVkit documentation](https://livvkit.github.io/Docs/lex.html)
for details on how to develop an extension. Briefly, a absolute minimum
working example is provided by the `example/` extension, which should
be copied to provide the basis for your new extension. All extensions
are required to contain a minimal working example set of data such that
they can be run an executed on any machine.

For extensions that require data for which re-host permission cannot be
granted, they must include documentation on how to acquire and use the
data as well as either a small set of processed data or a set of
\"fake\" example data.

## Issues, questions, comments, etc.?

If you would like to suggest features, request tests, discuss
contributions, report bugs, ask questions, or contact us for any reason,
use the [LIVVkit issue
tracker](https://github.com/LIVVkit/LIVVkit/issues). [LEX issue
tracker](https://github.com/LIVVkit/lex/issues).

Want to send us a private message?

**Michael E. Kelleher** :github: \@mkstratos

**Joseph H. Kennedy** :github: \@jhkennedy

**Katherine J. Evans** :github: \@kevans32

[^1]:   Evans, K.J., J.H. Kennedy, D. Lu, M.M. Forrester, S. Price, J. Fyke,
    A.R. Bennett, M.J. Hoffman, I. Tezaur, C.S. Zender, and M. Vizcaino
    (2019). LIVVkit 2.1: Automated and extensible ice sheet model
    validation. *Geoscientific Model Development.* https://gmd.copernicus.org/articles/12/1067/2019/

[^2]: This assumes the new data files conform to the format of the
    included data files. That is, an extension that analyses output from
    the CISM-Albany ice sheet model will likely be able to analyze any
    similar CISM-Albany simulation, but likely would *not* be able to
    analyze output from the PISM ice sheet model without \"massaging\"
    the PISM files into a CISM-Albany like structure, or adjusting the
    extension. *This is a problem we are working on for future LEX
    releases.*

Commit message:

Switch to Pixi for environment management

README.md, after:

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wiki/LIVVkit/LIVVkit/imgs/livvkit.png)

# LIVVkit Extensions (LivvEX)

This repository holds a collection of extensions to
[LIVVkit](https://livvkit.github.io/Docs/index.html) for validation and
custom analyses of ice sheet models and their associated Earth system
models.

LEX was first described in Evans, et al., 2019[^1]

## Dependencies

The Python dependencies are listed in requirements.txt and requirements-dev.txt but
this suite depends on a set of reanalysis and observational datasets,
which are part of E3SM-Diags, available on several DOE supported
machines, including Perlmutter at NERSC, and Chrysalis at ANL\'s LCRC.

The Python package itself is described in `pyproject.toml`, which is used by
`pip` to install this package

Currently, LEX is designed to run on NERSC's Perlmutter, and ANL-LCRC's Chrysalis,
but future work is planned to support other machines where E3SM runs.

## Environment setup

For setting up an environment to which lex and dependencies will be
installed, Pixi and conda are documented here. **NB** this
will only currently work on Perlmutter and Chrysalis, the environment should be
created there.

### Pixi environment
[pixi](https://pixi.sh/latest/) is a package management tool, and the primary
environment management tool for LEX.
First, it must be [installed](https://pixi.prefix.dev/latest/installation/) locally.
Then an enviornment for lex development can be created:
```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/LIVVkit/lex.git
$ cd lex
$ pixi install --all     # This will install the default and development environments
$ pixi shell -e default  # To activate the default (runtime) environment
$ pixi shell -e dev      # To activate the dev environment (for code testing and checks)
```

### Conda environment
```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/LIVVkit/lex.git
$ cd lex
$ {conda, mamba} create -n lex_env python --file requirements.txt
$ {conda, mamba} activate lex_env
$ pip install -e .    # Installs the lex module as an editable Python package to the lex_env environment.
```

## Basic usage

Within the `lex/config` directory there are templates for
ELM r05 and r025 resolutions, as well as pre-existing configurations for
several current runs.

To execute any of these analyses, point `livv` (LIVVkit\'s command line
interface) to any of these extensions via the the `-V/--validate`
option.

For example, to run the minimal example extension, place the output
website in the `vv_test` directory, and serve the output
website you\'d run this command:

```bash
$ livv -V config/example/example.yml -o vv_test -s
```
This will create a directory in the current directory called `vv_test` (~7.5 MB), and spawn an HTTP server, which should only be used for testing purposes. (This works best if the output is in the current directory)

*Note:* All the extension configurations files assume you are working
from the top level `lex` directory. You *can* run any of these
extensions from any directory, but you will need to edit the paths in
the YAML configuration files so that `livv` can find the required files.

Likewise, you can also apply these analyses to any new model run[^2] by
adjusting the paths to point to your model run.

## Running existing cases on PM-CPU

The `lex/run_livv.sh` script will run all the currently
available analyses on pm-cpu for a particular case, e.g.:
```bash
$ cd $HOME/lex
$ ./run_livv.sh v2.1.r025.IGERA5ELM_MLI-deep_firn_1980_2020
```
Will create a web output at `/global/cfs/projectdirs/e3sm/www/${USER}/v2.1.r025.IGERA5ELM_MLI-deep_firn_1980_2020`,
viewable at https://portal.nersc.gov/project/e3sm/${USER}/v2.1.r025.IGERA5ELM_MLI-deep_firn_1980_2020

The batch script provided will run all current cases on Perlmutter on a
compute node in parallel
```bash
$ cd lex
$ sbatch run_lex_pm-cpu.sbatch
```

## Running new cases on PM-CPU

### Generate a single timeseries file from ELM h0 outputs
- `ncrcat -v topo,landfrac,QSNOFRZ,FSRND,FSRVD,FSDSVD,FSDSND,EFLX_LH_TOT,FIRA,FLDS,FSA,FSDS,FSH,QICE,QRUNOFF,QSNOMELT,QSOIL,RAIN,SNOW,TSA,SNOWICE,SNOWLIQ,H2OSNO elm*h0*.nc -o ${CASE}.nc`

### Perform post-processing on a single time series ELM h0 output
- Edit the `lex/lex/postproc/e3sm/postproc.sbatch` batch file to mach the new run

    Key variables:
    - `INDIR`: Path which contains single output time series file
    - `OUTCASE`: Name of the new case which is the name of the netCDF file without extension (e.g. `v2.1.r025.IGERA5ELM_MLI-deep_firn_1980_2020`)
    - `RES`: ELM output resolution (currently accepts `R05` and `R025`)
    - `OUTDIR`: Scratch directory into which climatology files will be written, defaults to `${SCRATCH}/lex/data/e3sm/${OUTCASE}`
- Run the post-processing script:
  - `cd lex/lex/postproc/e3sm; sbatch postproc.sbatch`

**NB**: the `postproc.sbatch` script will create the configuration for your case (based on `OUTCASE` and `OUTDIR`), then run LIVVkit on it with `lex/run_livv.sh`

## Developing a custom extension

See the [LIVVkit documentation](https://livvkit.github.io/Docs/lex.html)
for details on how to develop an extension. Briefly, a absolute minimum
working example is provided by the `example/` extension, which should
be copied to provide the basis for your new extension. All extensions
are required to contain a minimal working example set of data such that
they can be run an executed on any machine.

For extensions that require data for which re-host permission cannot be
granted, they must include documentation on how to acquire and use the
data as well as either a small set of processed data or a set of
\"fake\" example data.

## Issues, questions, comments, etc.?

If you would like to suggest features, request tests, discuss
contributions, report bugs, ask questions, or contact us for any reason,
use the [LIVVkit issue
tracker](https://github.com/LIVVkit/LIVVkit/issues). [LEX issue
tracker](https://github.com/LIVVkit/lex/issues).

Want to send us a private message?

**Michael E. Kelleher** :github: \@mkstratos

**Joseph H. Kennedy** :github: \@jhkennedy

**Katherine J. Evans** :github: \@kevans32

[^1]:   Evans, K.J., J.H. Kennedy, D. Lu, M.M. Forrester, S. Price, J. Fyke,
    A.R. Bennett, M.J. Hoffman, I. Tezaur, C.S. Zender, and M. Vizcaino
    (2019). LIVVkit 2.1: Automated and extensible ice sheet model
    validation. *Geoscientific Model Development.* https://gmd.copernicus.org/articles/12/1067/2019/

[^2]: This assumes the new data files conform to the format of the
    included data files. That is, an extension that analyses output from
    the CISM-Albany ice sheet model will likely be able to analyze any
    similar CISM-Albany simulation, but likely would *not* be able to
    analyze output from the PISM ice sheet model without \"massaging\"
    the PISM files into a CISM-Albany like structure, or adjusting the
    extension. *This is a problem we are working on for future LEX
    releases.*
